---
title: "Annual review 2024 - 2) Best memories"
date: 2024-12-22T16:30:00-05:00
publishDate: 2024-12-22T16:30:00-05:00
author: "Morgan Bye"
draft: false

tags: ["Annual review"]
summary: "Rapid fire, what were the best moments, people and places of the year?"

---

_This post is part of my annual review process for 2024. This year, I've committing to writing a more comprehensive review, but to do so I've structured myself into particular areas that I think are important to cover._

_To read more,_

1. [Intro](https://morganbye.com/posts/20250101_1/)
2. [Best memories](https://morganbye.com/posts/20250101_2/)
3. [Health - Running](https://morganbye.com/posts/20250101_3/)

**Best Surprise**
Sadly nothing comes to mind. It just wasn't much of a surprising year. I was pretty pleased with some of my mentees getting new jobs.

**Best Meal**
Toad-in-the-hole, in a tiny, open-fire, farmer's pub in the middle of England's Peak District. A good pint, with a good friend after a long time out of the motherland hit all the nostalgia spots.

**Coolest New Experience**
Offroad ATVs in the Dominican Republic. Just a pity the coordination around it was rather rubbish, and the claimed 2 hour safari, was more of a 10 minute blast

**Favourite Weekend**
Back in the UK, jet lagged and going to a gig - the 20th anniversary tour of the third album I ever bought. Hipster mini-golf. Bowling. Beer. Steaks. Worms.

**Favourite First Meeting**
Marion. An infinitely interesting, powerful and motivated friend.

**Favourite New City**
Did I see any new cities? The Dominican Republic was new, but not really a city.

Leicester takes the crown in my "_What the hell happened to this place?_" award.

**Favourite Sports Moment**
Gave up on sports a long time ago. The only thing I've paid even any notice to has been the world marathon circuit with crazy attempts at course records at Boston and NYC.

**Favourite New Walk**
Mam Tor, near Hope, North of England

**Favourite New Friend**
Marion

**Favourite Tour**
I'm going to choose to believe this is a music and band question. I saw Taking Back Sunday, Thrice, Enter Shikari and Bullet for my Valentine live this year, and all of them were on some variant of "_we've been doing this for 20 years, so thank you_". Playing the old stuff, gets you in the feels.

**Favourite Day**

**Most Intense Week**
Release week for the supermarket. Drama at home. Drama with the client. 7 days in the office. Living and breathing code for 10+ hours a day for the first time in years. Thrilling.

**Favourite Artist**
Only recently discovered, [There's a Light](https://open.spotify.com/artist/38dVO903tRh8V1Eek6sabV?si=u8xkcb_JSxGfwca6aaZ0NQ) - the album [A Long Lost Silence](https://open.spotify.com/album/49VKcJU1siwrXQOwfcs9G9?si=FFOkSL3ORiq9TnXrNvgzfQ), is excellent. It reflects my melancholy. It reminds me of sitting in dark rooms as a teenager just _listening_ to music.

**Favourite Song**
[Sans Soleil](https://open.spotify.com/track/2HxHylSuO7W9hLL2t1Dk3s?si=bf9cc65fe05a4976) by Alexisonfire. After seeing them support Avenged Sevenfold, and seeing this one live, it's been on heavy repeat.

Close second is [He Films The Clouds Pt.2](https://open.spotify.com/track/07nYZZQT49i7yAIs3k3tOe?si=4df0f341d12d4626) by Maybeshewill. It's just a song I keep coming back to, time and time again.

And then after seeing Enter Shikari live, [Sorry You're Not A Winner](https://open.spotify.com/track/6PwxotrB99xgatKVzibmkz?si=ddfb6921facc4e69) was on repeat for a month.

**Favourite Concert**
SOiL - the (nearly) 25th anniversary of the [Scars](https://open.spotify.com/album/2h9pGOK3WpnKM6sJjILl5E?si=fJi1iwZ8Tzu_MtQuVRpgmw) album. A great night.

**Favourite Quote**
Women need love for sex, men need sex to love
